GI: 101
Hepatic iron overload
•	 Regardless of the eti  ology, the iron-overloaded liver is hypointense on all MRI sequences 
relati  ve to the paraspinal muscles as an internal control, and there is signal dropout on in-
phase images.
•	 There are two pathways to excess hepati  c iron accumulati  on, as described below. 
•	 Primary hemochromatosis is the most common cause of iron overload, due to a geneti  c 
defect causing increased iron absorpti  on through the GI tract. 
Excess iron is deposited in hepatocytes (not the Kupff  er cells that make up the intrahepati  c 
reti  culoendothelial system or RES), pancreas, myocardium, skin, and joints. Excess iron in hepatocytes can 
cause cirrhosis.
Liver and pancreas are markedly T2 hypointense and show signal dropout on in-phase images. The spleen 
and bone marrow are normal since the RES is not involved.
Treatment of primary hemochromatosis is phlebotomy.
Primary hemochromatosis: Axial T2-weighted MRI 
demonstrates diff  use low T2 signal in the liver and 
pancreas with associated signal loss on in-phase 
imaging (not shown).
•	 Secondary hemochromatosis is usually seen in diseases that cause hemosiderosis, where 
excess iron accumulates within the RES. This may be due to frequent blood transfusions or 
defecti  ve erythrocytosis. Treatment of hemosiderosis is with iron chelators, not phlebotomy.
The RES has a large capacity for iron. Therefore, iron stored in the RES is generally not harmful and the 
liver is normal in morphology without cirrhosis. However, when the RES becomes overwhelmed with iron, 
the hepatocytes begin to store the excess. Just as in primary hemochromatosis, hepatocyte iron uptake 
may lead to cirrhosis.
MRI imaging of hemosiderosis demonstrates hypointense liver on conventi  onal MRI sequences and signal 
drop on in-phase images, as in hemochromatosis. Additi  onally, the spleen and bone marrow will also 
appear hypointense due to increased iron stores throughout the enti  re reti  culoendothelial system. The 
pancreas is spared.
Primary = Pancreas
Secondary = Spleen
In-phase MRI
 Out-of-phase MRI
 T2-weighted MRI
Secondary hemochromatosis: Multi  sequence MRI shows diff  use low T2 signal in the liver and spleen with 
associated signal loss on in-phase imaging compared to out-of-phase imaging, consistent with iron depositi  on 
from hemosiderosis in this pati  ent with transfusion-dependent anemia.