GI: 188
Helicobacter pylori gastritis
•	 Helicobacter pylori is a major cause of gastriti  s, gastric ulcers, and duodenal ulcers.
Zollinger-Ellison (ZE) syndrome 
•	 Zollinger-Ellison (ZE) is gastrin over-producti  on from a gastrinoma, which is a 
neuroendocrine tumor located in the duodenum or pancreas that has a 50% rate of 
malignancy. ZE features elevated gastrin level and a paradoxical increase in gastrin aft  er 
secreti  n administrati  on.
•	 25% of pati  ents with gastrinoma have multi  ple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1.
MEN-1 consists of parathyroid adenoma, pituitary adenoma, and pancreati  c islet cell tumors.
Eosinophilic gastritis
•	 Eosinophilic gastriti  s is characterized by thickened folds in the stomach and small bowel in a 
pati  ent with a history of atopy. 
Ménétrier disease (hypertrophic gastropathy)
•	 Ménétrier disease is a protein-losing enteropathy that is oft  en a diagnosis of exclusion. It 
usually aff  ects the proximal stomach and is pathologically characterized by replacement of 
parietal cells by hyperplasti  c epithelial cells, leading to achlorhydria.
•	 Ménétrier disease has a controversial associati  on with gastric carcinoma.
Crohn's disease
•	 The stomach is rarely an isolated site of involvement by Crohn's disease. Usually the distal 
half of the stomach is aff  ected.
•	 Typical imaging features include thickened folds and mural ulcers most commonly aff  ecti  ng 
the antrum with eventual tubular stenosis of the antrum leading to the characteristi  c ram’s 
horn appearance.
Diff  erenti  al diagnosis of the ram’s horn appearance is sarcoid, Crohn’s disease, and treated ulcer disease.
Other causes of thickened gastric folds
•	 Gastric varices (from portal hypertension), sarcoidosis, gastric lymphoma, and submucosal 
carcinoma are non-infl  ammatory causes of thickened gastric folds.
Gastric polyps
Hyperplastic polyp (infl  ammatory polyp)
•	 A hyperplasti  c polyp, also known as an infl  ammatory polyp, is a cysti  c dilati  on of a gastric 
gland that develops in response to chronic infl  ammati  on, oft  en associated with H. pylori
infecti  on. Hyperplasti  c polyps are almost always benign, with very rare cases of malignant 
transformati  on having been reported.
Fundic gland polyps
Double-contrast barium study 
demonstrates a few small, round, 
well-circumscribed radiolucent 
fi  lling defects (arrows) within the 
greater curvature of the stomach, 
consistent with gastric polyps seen 
on pati  ent’s prior endoscopy.