GI: 103
Cirrhosis
Etiology and pathology
•	 Cirrhosis is the replacement of functi  oning hepatocytes with dysfuncti  onal fi  broti  c ti  ssue, 
caused by repeated cycles of injury and repair. Eti  ologies include metabolic (alcohol, 
steatohepati  ti  s, hemochromatosis, or Wilson disease), infecti  ous (chronic hepati  ti  s B or C), 
or infl  ammatory (primary biliary cirrhosis or primary sclerosing cholangiti  s). The hallmarks 
of cirrhosis are disorganized att  empted regenerati  on in the form of nodules and fi  brosis.
1
2
2
2
3
4
5
6
7
2
4
4
Intrahepatic signs of cirrhosis:
1. Nodular contour of the liver
2. Segmental atrophy and hypertrophy
Atrophy
- Segment V, VI, VII, VIII (right lobe)
- Segment IV (medial segment of the left lobe)
Hypertrophy
- Segment I (caudate) 
- Segment II, III (lateral segment of the left lobe)
3. Enlargement of the hilar periportal space
4. Expanded gallbladder fossa sign
5. Peribiliary cysts
6. Intrahepatic /f_ibrosis
7. Right posterior hepatic notch sign
8. Iron deposition (not shown)
Early signs of cirrhosis
•	 One of the earliest signs of cirrhosis is expansion of the periportal spaces. Atrophy of the 
medial segment of the left   hepati  c lobe in early cirrhosis causes increased fat anterior to the 
right main portal vein.
•	 Enlargement of caudate lobe is a specifi  c sign of cirrhosis. Specifi  cally, a caudate to right 
lobe size rati  o of >0.65 highly suggests cirrhosis. As discussed previously, the caudate drains 
directly to the IVC, not via the hepati  c veins, which is initi  ally protecti  ve against cirrhosis.
•	 The empty gallbladder fossa sign results when hepati  c parenchyma surrounding the 
gallbladder is replaced with periportal fat.
Secondary manifestations of cirrhosis
•	 Portal hypertension causes splenomegaly and formati  on of portosystemic collaterals/
varices, including recanalizati  on of the paraumbilical vein.
Gamna-Gandy bodies are splenic microhemorrhages secondary to portal hypertension. These appear as 
ti  ny echogenic foci on US, ti  ny hypo- or hyperatt  enuati  ng foci on CT, and ti  ny hypointense foci on in-phase 
MRI. This is discussed further later in the chapter.
•	 Gallbladder wall thickening is due to hypoalbuminemia and resultant edema.
•	 Micronodular cirrhosis causes cirrhoti  c nodules less than 3 mm in size and is usually 
associated with alcoholism.