GI: 160
Gastrinoma (continued)
•	 The gastrinoma triangle describes the typical locati  on of gastrinomas in an area bounded by 
the juncti  on of the cysti  c duct and CBD, the duodenum inferiorly, and the neck/body of the 
pancreas medially.
Three junctions of gastrinoma triangle
(1) CBD and cystic duct
(2) pancreatic neck and body
(3) second and third portions of duodenum
1
2
3
•	 High gastrin levels can lead to formati  on of carcinoid tumors in the stomach, which may 
regress aft  er the gastrinoma is resected.
Other pancreatic endocrine tumors
•	 Glucagonoma is the third most common pancreati  c endocrine tumor. Pati  ents may present 
with migratory rash, diabetes, and glossiti  s. They have a high rate of malignant behavior 
(~80%) and 50–60% have liver metastases at diagnosis. Prognosis is poor. 
•	 VIPoma (Vasoacti  ve Intesti  nal Pepti  de) is a rare pancreati  c endocrine tumor. Pati  ents may 
present with profuse watery diarrhea and hypokalemia. Most are malignant and 60–80% 
have liver metastases at diagnosis.
•	 Somatostati  noma is very rare. Pati  ents may present with abdominal pain, diarrhea and 
impaired glucose tolerance. 50–75% of pati  ents have liver or lymph node metastases at 
diagnosis.
Systemic diseases that affect the pancreas
Pancreatic lymphoma
•	 B-cell lymphoma is the most common subtype of lymphoma to aff  ect the pancreas. There is 
almost always associated adenopathy and multi  organ involvement by the ti  me the pancreas 
is involved.
•	 The typical imaging appearance is of a homogeneously, diff  usely enlarged gland without 
ductal dilatati  on, with associated lymphadenopathy. More aggressive types of lymphoma 
may show heterogeneity/central necrosis.
von Hippel-Lindau
•	 von Hippel-Lindau is an inherited multi  systemic disease which confers increased risk of 
multi  ple malignancies and leads to formati  on of cysts in various organs including the 
pancreas.
•	 Pancreati  c neoplasms seen in von Hippel-Lindau include serous cystadenoma and pancreati  c 
neuroendocrine tumors.