GI: 167
Inflammatory splenic lesions
Sarcoidosis
•	 Sarcoidosis is a systemic disease of unknown eti  ology characterized histologically by multi  ple 
nodules composed of noncaseati  ng granulomas.
•	 When sarcoidosis involves the spleen, splenomegaly is the most common presenti  ng fi  nding, 
oft  en associated with hepatomegaly and lymphadenopathy.
•	 Less commonly, sarcoidosis may involve the spleen in a multi  nodular patt  ern with numerous 
hypoatt  enuati  ng 1–3 cm lesions demonstrati  ng essenti  ally no enhancement.
These nodules are formed by coalescent sarcoid granulomas and have low signal on all MRI sequences.
Sarcoid nodules are most conspicuous on T2-weighted images and early-phase post-contrast T1-weighted 
images. On the post-contrast images, the nonenhancing nodules will stand out against the avidly 
enhancing splenic parenchyma.
•	 Imaging appearance is generally indisti  nguishable from splenic lymphoma.
Infl  ammatory pseudotumor
•	 Splenic infl  ammatory pseudotumor is a rare focal collecti  on of immune cells and associated 
infl  ammatory exudate of unclear eti  ology. Pati  ents oft  en have consti  tuti  onal symptoms 
including fever and malaise.
•	 Infl  ammatory pseudotumor has a variable and nonspecifi  c imaging appearance, but a typical 
presentati  on is of a well-circumscribed, heterogeneously enhancing mass.
Splenic infection
Pyogenic abscess
Axial and coronal contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen demonstrates a heterogeneous gas-containing 
fl  uid collecti  on (arrows) within the medial spleen with irregular wall thickening and surrounding perisplenic 
stranding. This was a case of Staph. aureus pyogenic splenic abscess that was subsequently drained 
percutaneously. 
•	 Splenic bacterial abscesses are uncommon and usually seen in immunocompromised 
pati  ents. A solitary abscess is much more likely to be bacterial. In contrast, multi  focal small 
abscesses are more likely to be fungal.
•	 On CT, a bacterial abscess usually has an irregular, enhancing wall. Gas is not usually seen 
but is highly specifi  c for a bacterial abscess when present.
•	 A characteristi  c ultrasound fi  nding is the wheel within a wheel or bull’s-eye appearance, 
which describes concentric hyperechoic and hypoechoic rings surrounding the abscess.
•	 Treatment is CT- or ultrasound-guided percutaneous drainage in additi  on to anti  bioti  cs.